The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Making of a Man, by George R. Fuller
Company

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Making of a Man
       Being a description of Artificial Limbs and how they may be
       adopted by those who have suffered Loss of their Natural Limbs

Author: George R. Fuller Company

Release Date: August 1, 2021 [eBook #65975]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: MFR and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAKING OF A MAN ***




_The Making of a Man_

[Illustration]




                               The Making
                                of a Man

                         BEING A DESCRIPTION OF
                          ARTIFICIAL LIMBS AND
                             HOW THEY MAY BE
                          ADOPTED BY THOSE WHO
                          HAVE SUFFERED LOSS OF
                           THEIR NATURAL LIMBS

                             [Illustration]

                        George R. Fuller Company
                            Rochester, N. Y.

          23 West Swan Street } BRANCHES { 50 North 13th Street
           Buffalo, N.Y.     }          {   Philadelphia, Pa.

                           COPYRIGHTED 1902 BY
                          GEORGE R. FULLER CO.

             NOTE.—The copyright covers the arrangement and
           phraseology of the text as well as the drawings and
            engravings. The right of translation is reserved.




[Illustration: ARTIFICIAL LIMBS]




_Introduction_


The making of a man is a process of time, of training and of progress.
The babe, indeed, may be born perfect in physical proportions and in
possession of normal faculties; but no product of Nature may stand still.
Growth or decay is the lot of every one, and the man—the full and perfect
man—is the result of physical and mental development.

There has never been a time when physical development has received so
much attention as at present, or when its importance has been so greatly
appreciated. Physical culture and exercise in the open air have resulted
in making men and women stronger and healthier, and consequently more
graceful in carriage and figure and better fitted to enjoy the pleasures
and perform the duties of life. The conviction is now general that to
produce the highest type of man the cultivation and development of the
physical structure should proceed with the cultivation of the mind; but
on the other hand, the wise do not admit that the practice of devoting
too much attention to athletics should be encouraged, however prevalent
this practice may be said to be at many leading colleges. The proper
ratio should be observed.

It is not desirable, to be sure, that the race should become one of
ignorant giants, but nevertheless the value of exercise and of physical
work cannot be disputed. The right to pursue this value should be shared
by all mankind. Fortunately it has been made possible now, as it formerly
was not, for those who have lost limbs to indulge in rightful exercise
and perform necessary physical work notwithstanding their misfortunes.
The activities of life, with their resulting benefit, are no longer
denied them.

Surgery, the scientific making of mechanical devices for the correction
of deformities, and the manufacture of artificial substitutes for
lost limbs, have led in the advance of methods intended to better the
condition or ameliorate the suffering of humanity.

Time was when the loss of a leg meant the stumping through the balance
of life on a crotched stick. There was Peter Stuyvesant, for instance,
whose portrait is shown on the cover of this catalogue. He lost a leg in
the wars in the West Indies in 1640. Thereafter, during the time he was
the last Dutch Director General of New Netherlands—from 1647 until his
surrender to the English in 1664—and to his death in New York in 1682 at
the ripe old age of eighty, he pegged his way along. He was a man well
able to afford the best in life, but nothing better than the ordinary peg
leg was then obtainable, and so for forty years or more Peter Stuyvesant
suffered the inconvenience due to the crude device.

Now, fortunately for the afflicted, better things are possible. Science
and art have combined so successfully in the manufacture of our
artificial limbs that not only is the wearer free from discomfort but
he is enabled to continue his career of activity, and pursue, as may be
necessary, his labors for a livelihood. Besides, the perfection of design
and manufacture of these aids makes their presence difficult of detection.

Not only is ordinary labor well performed, but many remarkable feats are
accomplished by wearers of limbs of our manufacture. A few instances are
cited below.

A noted pitcher of a baseball team and a remarkable bicycle rider,
although deprived in early life of both legs by accident, is able to hold
a position of prominence in his profession.

An operator constantly on his feet in a signal tower suffers no
inconvenience. After making five experiments he has found finally
that the artificial leg with which we have equipped him is the most
comfortable he has ever worn.

A crack bicycle rider, both of whose legs have been amputated, one above
the knee and one below, pronounces our substitute faultless. He is able
not only to mount and dismount with ease but to perform all manner of
tricks and fancy riding, doing this as well as his competitors blessed
with sound, muscular, natural limbs. Besides, he has a mile track record
of 2.37.

Money will not buy happiness, but it will aid in its attainment. Money
will not compensate for the loss of a limb, but it will buy a fair
substitute if one knows where to procure it.

One having a valuable and delicate watch needing repairs would naturally
be very cautious into whose hands it was entrusted. In the event of
sickness we are apt to be very careful into whose care we place the
patient. Careful inquiry is made as to the reliability of the physician
and his experience, whether or not he has been successful, if he
understands his business and is honest in his purpose; if his advice will
be given in the best interests of the patient, or whether his own profit
is of first importance to him.

It is entirely proper to ask similar questions in regard to the makers of
artificial limbs; but too often people are careless in the matter, and
place the case in the hands of almost anybody in the business, without
regard to responsibility or reliability. Thus the remedy secured is often
worse than the disease. The strictest investigation should be made. A
competent maker should be selected. The case being entrusted to him,
the minor details should be left to his judgment, with faith that his
experience and thorough understanding of his business will produce the
best result.

No single style of limb is suitable for all cases. Appropriate and
distinct construction is necessary, that the limb shall meet the
requirements of the person who is to be compelled to wear it. Recognizing
the truth of this, we have been led to the study of the peculiarities and
individual needs of each case presented to us. Our limbs are constructed
with such a variety of joints and attachments that each appliance may be
accurately adapted to any variation in the condition or occupation of
the patient. If any doubt exists as to the result in any case, we give
ample opportunity for experiment at our expense. It is for this reason
that so many purchasers have spoken in the highest terms of praise of our
efforts and the results.

[Illustration]

We do not seek to discredit other manufacturers, but simply, in full
confidence, we state that we are the makers of the best goods obtainable.
In the pages following we have endeavored to convey some idea of the
ingenuity and artistic skill which we bestow upon our work.

For over forty years—in fact, since 1856—we have conducted our business
in Rochester without interruption and with increasing prosperity. Until
1876 the business was conducted by Dr. Douglas Bly, who founded it. Then
for twenty years Mr. Fuller personally continued the business, until in
1896 the present company was incorporated under the laws of the State
of New York with a paid-up capital of $25,000. The patience and skill
exercised throughout these years have evolved the limb we term “The
Walk-Easy Leg,” and placed us at the head of manufacturers of artificial
limbs. Our efforts have been always to improve and perfect—to excel at
every point. We are assured that these efforts have met with approval.
We enjoy the confidence of those who have found need of our services.
As a further evidence that we have successfully sought to excel, it
may be stated that during the past twenty years, notwithstanding
active competition, we have supplied the United States Government with
one-quarter in number of all the limbs furnished to pensioners. We also
have supplied officially the States of Virginia, Georgia, South Carolina
and Louisiana. Furthermore, our work has been placed in the first class
by various scientific boards convened for the purpose, and it has
received the endorsement of the world’s most famous surgeons.

Aside from the personal testimony of the multitudes throughout the
country who have availed themselves of our experience and skill, and have
offered to bear witness to the good we have done them, we refer as to
our financial standing and reliability to Dun or Bradstreet mercantile
agencies, or to any bank or public man in our city or vicinity.

Intending purchasers are invited to correspond with us, that they may
receive, if they are necessary or desirable, fuller details than are
covered in this work. We are always glad to receive inquiries and offer
suggestions for the comfort of our customers.

GEORGE R. FULLER COMPANY, ROCHESTER, N. Y.

[Illustration]

Patents have been granted us as follows:

    April 19, 1859                               No.  23,656
    April 30, 1859                               No.  25,238
    February 19, 1861                            No.  31,438
    July 20, 1862                                No.  38,549
    May 19, 1863                                 No.  38,550
    July 28, 1857   Re-issued July 7, 1863       No.   1,510
    May 17, 1859  }
    July 3, 1860  } Re-issued July 12, 1864      No.   1,724
    Dec. 23, 1862 }
    October 11, 1864                             No.  44,638
    September 4, 1866                            No.  57,666
    March 9, 1869                                No.  87,624
    April 19, 1887                               No. 361,405
    October 4, 1887                              No. 370,774


_Amputations_

It is probable that such a publication as this will be read only by
those who have lost limbs or by their immediate friends. To advance an
opinion here as to the length of stump or the kind of operation best
adapted to the subsequent application of an artificial limb would be
of little benefit, and might, indeed, suggest dissatisfaction to the
sufferer and cause injury to the operator. The preservation of life is
the object of amputations. Surgeons generally appreciate the importance
of the operation and their own responsibility. They undertake it with
reluctance. Often during such an operation exigencies arise or unforeseen
conditions so present themselves as to preclude any observance of
suggestions relating to the selection of a point for amputation and
preparation of the stump for the exercise of the restorative art of
prosthesis. Then the surgeon has no choice if he would save life. It
is better not to criticise the operation and malign the operator, but
to believe the best results possible under the circumstances have been
attained and be thankful that the outcome is no worse.


_Treatment of the Stump_

In preparation for the application of an artificial leg, and as soon as
it is healed sufficiently to permit it without pain or irritation, the
stump should be kept tightly bandaged from the end up to the knee, if
the amputation be below, or up to the body if the amputation be above
the knee. The bandaging will diminish and solidify the stump, leaving
it in a much more desirable condition for fitting and rendering the
successful use of a leg more a matter of certainty. If neglected, the
chances are that a soft, flabby stump will be the result, which will
rapidly reduce after the patient begins the use of a leg, but a refitting
or an uncomfortable amount of filling up in the socket to compensate for
the shrinkage of the stump will be necessary in order to walk with the
least degree of ease or satisfaction. The remaining joints, particularly
the knee joint, should be kept in motion as much as can be conveniently,
every day; this will prevent their becoming anchylosed (stiff and
inflexible). Should this warning come too late, and the joint is already
anchylosed, it should be gently and gradually exercised, and oily,
relaxing applications applied until straightened and flexible. A free
daily use of the cold water bath and brisk rubbing will prove beneficial.
An application of a solution of tannin and alcohol will toughen the skin,
and in many cases it would be an excellent thing to continue the use of
this solution after an artificial leg has been applied.


_How Soon After an Amputation_

There is a diversity of opinion as to how early a substitute may be
applied. Many surgeons strongly urge that an artificial leg cannot be
safely fitted for several months after cicatrization occurs, while, on
the other hand, some manufacturers of artificial limbs claim that a leg
can be satisfactorily fitted just as soon as the stump has healed, no
matter if it be but five or six weeks after the amputation.

Much, of course, depends upon the condition of the patient, in
circumstance and constitution. It many times occurs that while the edges
of the flaps have united, and cicatrization appears, ossification at the
sawn end of the bones has not taken place, consequently the necessary
pressure and tension on the surrounding integuments and other adjacent
parts in wearing a leg will unavoidably cause inconvenience, irritation
and pain. It is therefore our opinion, based upon experience and
observation, that in most cases an artificial leg should not be fitted
within _three months_ after amputation, and that if the edges of the
wound have thoroughly united at the end of that time it is _unnecessary
to wait longer_, except to harden and reduce the stump by bandaging, if
this has not previously been done. There are many good reasons why a leg
should be applied as soon as practicable after this time (provided that
the stump has healed), the chief one being that there is nothing that
will discipline and strengthen a stump and remaining joints as quickly
and as effectually as the use of a properly fitted artificial leg.

[Illustration]


_Material of Construction_

The materials used in the construction of artificial limbs are,
principally, tough English willow, leather, metal and rubber. The wood
parts, when worked to the desired shape, are covered with parchment or
rawhide and finished with a flesh-tinted waterproof enamel.


_Artificial Legs for Children_

When children have been deprived, by accident or disease, of one or
both lower limbs, artificial legs should be applied as soon as the
condition of the stump will safely permit. It is too generally presumed
that an outgrown limb is of no further use, and that the purchase of an
artificial leg before full growth is assured means a foolish expenditure.

This is wrong, at least so far as our work is concerned; there are
artificial legs made that it would be very expensive to lengthen or
change, but any leg that is made by us, or under our name or supervision,
we will agree to lengthen at any future time, as necessity may arise,
at a cost not to exceed five dollars, and in many cases not to exceed
three or four dollars. When the amputation is above the knee, it is often
necessary that the leg be lengthened both above and below the knee-joint.
This involves more labor and consequently greater expense, but in no case
will the charge exceed five dollars.

For a very young child we would make the artificial foot one or two sizes
larger than the natural one; in a year or so the natural foot will reach
the size of the artificial, and some months, perhaps years, will elapse
before the natural foot will be perceptibly larger than the artificial.
This method keeps the feet nearer the same size a longer time than would
be the case if the artificial foot were made the same size as the natural
foot in the first place. When it is necessary to increase the size of the
foot it can be easily and inexpensively done.

When children are deprived of these useful appendages, solely from fear
or apprehension that they may be outgrown, a lasting injustice is done
them. There is great danger of deformity and disease from the prolonged
use of crutches, particularly at a tender and susceptible age; and the
most natural, easy, graceful walkers on artificial legs are those who
commence the use of them in youth; the habit becomes thoroughly formed,
and the continued use of them from childhood develops and strengthens the
muscles and joints in a more effectual manner than can be accomplished by
any other process or treatment.


_Weight of Artificial Limbs_

It is not possible to reduce the weight of artificial legs below a
certain point without sacrificing strength and good wearing qualities.
The leg we construct weighs from two to five and one-half pounds, but
in some special cases where extreme strength is required this may be
exceeded. Much depends, however, upon the weight and occupation of the
wearer. Many legs of other makes which weigh no more than ours require
more of an effort to carry and swing them, because the action of the
rubber spring in the back part of our leg assists materially in carrying
the leg forward while in the act of walking, thus relieving the stump
from the effort that would otherwise be required to swing it. We aim to
have sufficient weight around the joints to support them securely; at
other points, where strength is not required, they are left a mere shell.
The weight of an artificial arm is much less, varying from one-half to
one and one-half pounds.


_Durability of Artificial Limbs_

The occupation of the wearer has much to do with the durability of an
artificial leg, but more depends upon the care and attention it receives.
We know of limbs that have been in constant use for eighteen or twenty
years and are undoubtedly good for several more years of good service,
and others, equally well made in every way, that because of neglect and
abuse have lasted only three or four years. These are the extremes,
however. The average durability of an artificial leg we estimate to be
from seven to eight years. Artificial arms not being subject to the
strain and wear of a leg will last much longer, the average time, we
should say, being double that of a leg. It should be borne in mind,
however, that they are but a mechanical imitation of Nature and require
attention the same as any other piece of mechanism, and that it pays to
keep them at all times clean and in good working order, and that the
better the care the better and more lasting will be the service.

    NOTE.—While preparing this article Mr. John S. Havens, of
    Plainwell, Michigan, called upon us wearing an artificial leg
    made at this factory in the spring of 1864, and the leg is
    still in excellent condition.


_How to Proceed in Ordering a Leg_

A very common error is prevalent in the minds of many that artificial
limbs are kept on hand in full assortments and varieties, and that it
is only necessary for a person to call and purchase one and wear it
away, the same as you would a pair of boots or shoes. Artificial legs
are only made to order, and it is preferable that the patient be present
at the factory for a day or two to have the leg fitted and give it a
thorough and satisfactory trial. Write to us, stating full particulars
of the case—when amputated, whether below or above the knee, length and
condition of the stump, etc. Also state the price you wish to pay for
a leg, and whether or not it will be practicable for you to come here
and have it fitted. If you can come here, name a day that will be most
convenient for you to do so, and we will be ready for you. If possible,
also specify time of day and by which route you will arrive in Rochester;
if you are unable to determine in season to advise us by mail, please do
so by telegraph, and we will have some one meet you at the station. A
shoe will be wanted here for the artificial foot. Your presence will be
required from one to two days, depending upon the difficulty in fitting
and the number of orders we have on hand; during this time you will have
an opportunity of putting the leg on, and giving it a thorough trial in
the rough. After you are satisfied with the test, you may return home and
the leg will be completed and forwarded to you in about ten days, or, if
you prefer to remain and wear it home, it will be finished in about a
week. Excellent hotel accommodations can be obtained for one dollar per
day or five dollars per week.


_Making Artificial Legs from Measurements_

For the benefit of persons who do not care to incur the expense and
inconvenience of a journey to the factory, we have perfected a chart
for measurements, and directions for taking profiles, plaster of paris
moulds, etc., that overcome all the difficulty and expense of a personal
visit. To make success doubly sure, when so desired we put the leg up
in the rough and forward it for trial; this gives the same opportunity
of trying it that would be had here. The leg can then be returned to us
with directions as to any changes that may be needed. To be sure, there
is some expense for transporting the leg, but it is small compared with
the cost of a journey here. A good share of our orders are being filled
in this manner, and with unvarying success. Indeed, there need be no fear
or hesitancy in sending orders to us for artificial legs to be made from
measurements, as we _guarantee a fit_. Should it prove otherwise, we will
make any required alterations without charge.


_Warranty_

The following is a copy of the warranty given with each leg. The time of
the warranty will depend entirely upon the price paid. See prices of the
various styles.

                                      ROCHESTER, N.Y., ______ 19__.

    In consideration of the sum of __ dollars, received from ______
    of ______ for an artificial leg, we hereby warrant the same,
    as follows: In case any part of said leg should, on account of
    poor material or bad workmanship, break or give way within __
    years from the date hereof, we agree to repair the same without
    charge, provided that, as soon as any defect is discovered, the
    leg, or any part thereof that needs to be repaired or replaced,
    be forwarded to us without delay, and at the expense of the
    owner. It is not the intention of this warranty to make good
    without charge the unavoidable wear of the leg, or breakage
    caused by accident, neglect or misuse.


_Prices_

Our prices are graded in such a manner as to make it possible for any
one to secure one of these reliable limbs, and are governed entirely by
the quality of the work and the time for which the limb is warranted,
and bear an exact proportion to the cost of production and the probable
cost of repairs during the term of the warranty. We have plans, which
we will be very glad to explain to any who desire to know about them,
whereby these limbs may be obtained without the expenditure of any money
whatever. Simply the giving of a little time and persistent work. Scores
have earned limbs in this way.


_Remittances_

Should be made by express, post office or express money order, registered
letter, or New York draft, whichever is most convenient for the sender.


_Terms_

It is our custom, as it is with all makers of special appliances of this
kind, to require in each case a cash deposit as a guarantee of good
faith. When the purchaser is present at the factory for the purpose of
having a limb fitted, the limb may be tried in the rough before making
any payment; if the fit and trial are satisfactory, one-half the price
will be required. When limbs are made from measurements, without the
presence of the patient at the factory, one-half the price of the limb
ordered should accompany the order. In both cases when the limb is
finished it will be delivered by express C.O.D. with the privilege of
examination and trial before making the final payment.

A careful consideration of the following facts should convince any
fair-minded person that this plan is not only reasonable and just but
very necessary.

[Illustration]

Each limb is made expressly to order for some one individual, and the
limb when completed is of little or no value to any one except the person
for whom it is made. It requires some degree of patience and perseverance
to overcome the awkwardness and possible disappointment associated with
the first trial of an artificial limb, and if there be no obligation and
no sacrifice on the part of the would-be purchaser provided the limb
is not accepted, there is a possibility of its being declined, and the
maker, through no fault of his work, becomes the loser. On the other
hand, the advance payment made on the limb insures a very persistent
effort on the part of the purchaser to wear it, resulting in success and
satisfaction.

The purchaser may rest assured that the work will not be slighted in any
degree whatsoever, and that it will be our duty and pleasure to make any
changes necessary to insure comfortable use of the limb any time within a
reasonable period after it is finished.


_Installment Payments_

We can consistently make a limb and accept installment payments therefor
only on the following conditions: On payment of one-half the price of the
limb with the order, the balance may be paid in amounts and at times—if
within reason—to suit the purchaser; say five dollars each month until
paid for, provided that these payments are secured by notes made or
endorsed by some reliable business man, or other equally good security.
We are perfectly willing to give time for a part payment as stated,
but must insist that we be amply secured against loss from any cause
whatever, and we cannot entertain any proposition wherein this is not
provided for.


_In Writing_

Describe your case as clearly and briefly as possible, stating whether
amputation is above or below the knee or elbow, when amputated, length
and condition of the stump, your age, weight and occupation, whether
you have ever worn an artificial limb, if so, how long and what make or
makes, and be particular to write your name and address plainly, giving
the post office, county and state. Any inquiries that are made on the
subject of artificial limbs will be promptly answered to the best of
our knowledge, and any information that we can give will be cheerfully
imparted.


_Artificial Limbs for U. S. Pensioners_

Every officer or enlisted or hired man who has lost a limb, or the
use of a limb, in the military or naval service of the United States,
is entitled to receive once every three years an artificial limb or
apparatus. Necessary transportation to the manufactory and return, by the
most usual and direct route, will be furnished to those desiring it for
the purpose of having artificial limbs fitted, but will not be furnished
except for this purpose. Sleeping-car accommodations will be given upon
request.

In March, 1891, the law was amended so as to allow an artificial limb
every three years instead of every five as before. The reduction in time
took effect in various ways but was to be counted from March 1, 1891. The
act operates in three ways:

    _First._ Those who were entitled on or after March 3, 1888, are
    entitled every three years from such last date.

    _Second._ Those who were entitled between March 3, 1886, and
    March 3, 1888, were again entitled March 3, 1891, and every
    three years from that date.

    _Third._ Those who were entitled before March 3, 1886, were
    again entitled five years from such date, and again every three
    years.

On request of any soldier we will give him the exact date on which he is
entitled to an order for a leg or for commutation.

Each officer and soldier has his choice either to receive a limb or its
equivalent in money. All who want limbs will gain by taking one from the
Government, because the Government will give transportation to and from
the manufactory, the cost of which in many cases is equal to the value of
the limb. Besides, the Government requires each manufacturer to warrant
his work and material used. The soldier who draws his money and buys a
limb for himself loses all these advantages. Many manufacturers of limbs
will advise soldiers to draw the money and then buy of them, so they will
not be obliged to warrant their limbs to the Government, or give a bond
for the same.

We furnish legs and arms for all kinds of amputations, on Government
orders. The necessary blanks on which the applications should be made for
limbs and transportation will be furnished to any soldier on application.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: _The_ WALKEASY ARTIFICIAL LEG]


_The Latest Progress in Artificial Limb Construction_

The WALKEASY leg is one of the more recent of the long list of our
artificial limb products. The name signifies more than is ordinarily
supposed by the public at large, and is only comprehended as it should
be by those who are so unfortunate as to require an artificial leg
possessing the requisites indicated by the name WALKEASY. To make the new
leg such as to truly maintain this name will be our aim and effort in all
cases.

As the weight of the body is imposed upon the artificial leg, under a
high pressure, changing from naught to the entire weight of the body, and
at times to double that weight or more, the least particle of chafing or
friction would soon cause soreness and might continue to that extent that
the limb would be impossible of good, and, moreover, a source of much
injury to the wearer. The amputation of a leg, therefore, requires on the
part of the artificial leg a double degree of responsibility; the limb
must not only fit the remaining mutilated part of the leg comfortably,
but must reproduce the general motion to a greater or lesser degree of
perfection. These are delicate features of artificial limb production,
and in no way are they more perfectly reproduced than in the WALKEASY leg.

The improvements represented by the WALKEASY leg are not simply
theoretical. We have been quietly experimenting with them for years, not
in the shop only, but they have been put into practical use by wearers,
of various professions and occupations—the correct way of testing an
appliance of this kind; otherwise we would not dare hazard our reputation
on their success.

The most approved points of excellence in both the ordinary rubber and
wooden feet are combined in the WALKEASY foot. The rubber and wooden
feet, as commonly constructed, while possessing desirable features, are
objectionable and unsuitable in many cases—the rubber foot on account
of its rigid, motionless ankle, and the wooden foot on account of the
hard, unyielding, springless material of which it is constructed. In the
WALKEASY foot both of these features are entirely done away with and the
desirable ones preserved.

The following are the eminently desirable features of the WALKEASY leg,
a combination of which is not to be found in any other artificial leg
manufactured:

    _First._ The removable sponge-rubber sole of the foot imparts
    a soft, noiseless tread, does not cut the stockings, gives a
    natural appearance in the shoe, relieves the wearer of much
    strain and jar in walking, greatly assists the ankle springs
    in their action, producing an increased lifelike motion, and
    greatly reduces the chances of breakage of any part of the leg.

    _Second._ The yielding rubber at bottom of foot provides for
    a little lateral or side motion, enough for all practical
    purposes.

    _Third._ The ankle joint is strongly constructed. A
    substance composed of fibre, in which plumbago (black lead)
    is incorporated, is used as a bearing on the ankle bolt or
    cylinder, making a lubricating and most satisfactory joint.

    _Fourth._ The sponge-rubber or felt sole, which can be easily
    and quickly removed and cheaply renewed or repaired without the
    necessity of procuring a new foot in case of wear or breakage.

    _Fifth._ No mechanical toe joint, the flexibility of the rubber
    or felt giving the desired motion.

    _Sixth._ The cords or tendons come in contact with no surfaces
    to cause friction or wear and are adjustable so as to give any
    desired mobility to the ankle joint.

    _Seventh._ Knee joints, for amputation below the knee, with
    four bearings, taper phosphor bronze bushings, and taper bolts,
    giving the greatest degree of wearing surface and requiring the
    least possible lubrication.

    _Eighth._ The purchaser has the choice of a wood socket,
    leather lacing socket, or the NEVERCHAFE spring socket, which
    ever is best adapted and most suitable for the peculiarities of
    his case, and for amputation below the knee an extra attachment
    is included for use in place of the knee joint and thigh lacer,
    at such times as it may suit the wearer to try it.

The best product in this line, if within the means of the purchaser,
should be the one chosen; but while the WALKEASY leg possesses so many
eminent features it is not more costly than the average product of other
manufacturers. Moreover, our guarantee is that if it fails in realizing
to the wearer what is promised to him, we are more than willing to secure
the point of perfection without extra charge, and make of it for the
wearer his ideal and not ours.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: 200 201 202 203]

    NUMBER 200

    WALKEASY leg for amputation above the knee, with adjustable
    leather lacing socket; any style of suspenders desired. Price
    $100. Warranted five years.

    NUMBER 201

    WALKEASY leg for amputation above the knee, with wood socket;
    any style of suspenders; also NEVERCHAFE socket, if desired,
    without extra charge. Price $100. Warranted five years.

    NUMBER 202

    WALKEASY knee-bearing leg, leather socket; used for very short
    stump below the knee, or for an inflexible knee-joint; wood
    socket made if preferred. Price $100. Warranted five years.

    NUMBER 203

    WALKEASY end-bearing leg for knee-joint amputation, leather
    socket; socket will be made of wood if preferred. Price $100.
    Warranted five years.

[Illustration: 204 205 206 207]

    NUMBER 204

    WALKEASY leg with adjustable leather lacing socket, for
    amputation below the knee; clasp thigh lacer; any other style
    used. Price $100. Warranted five years.

    NUMBER 205

    WALKEASY leg with wooden socket, for amputation below the knee;
    NEVERCHAFE socket used, if desired, without extra charge. Price
    $100. Warranted five years.

    NUMBER 206

    WALKEASY leg with leather lacing socket, without knee-joint or
    thigh support, for amputation below the knee; not suitable for
    short stumps. Price $75. Warranted five years.

    NUMBER 207

    WALKEASY leg with wooden socket, without knee-joint or thigh
    support, for amputation below the knee; not suitable for short
    stumps; NEVERCHAFE socket used, if desired, without additional
    expense. Price $75. Warranted five years.


_Sectional View of the Improved Walkeasy Leg_

[Illustration: 260 261 262 263]

No. 260. Some changes have been made in the ankle joint, but the notable
modifications are a foot with thick sponge-rubber removable sole, K-K,
in place of the rubber-covered core; for thigh amputations an adjustable
steel knee cord and spring piston, combined in one piece, E, and
knee-joint tightener, A.

The removable sole gives us an opportunity of strengthening the upper
part of foot with a rawhide covering. Between the wooden part J and the
rubber K at the toe part, layers of canvas and sole leather are placed
to prevent breaking or turning up of the toe. This, however, is hardly
necessary in most cases, but we consider it an additional protection.
With rubber-covered cores the rubber first breaks away from the top of
the core at the toe part, resulting in turning up of the toe, leaving
little chance to repair it satisfactorily without making a new foot. This
cannot very well take place with the rubber sole, as there is no rubber
above the wood to break away. If, however, it becomes necessary for any
reason to renew the rubber, the sole can be removed by simply taking a
screw out at the bottom of foot, and a new sole or part of a sole put on
at a trifling expense without sending the leg to us, as we keep on file a
pattern of each individual foot made. The greater security by which the
cord ends and the ankle-joint rods are kept in place, and the convenient
method of getting at them, are additional strong points commending the
change. See No. 261.

The combination knee cord and spring consists of a steel rod carefully
bushed at the joint and extending through a hickory bar in calf of the
leg, with a thick, soft leather washer on the rod under the bar, and a
nut at the end of rod that is reached with thumb and finger through
holes in back of leg for readily adjusting the length. For the knee
spring a suitably protected heavy elastic web is slipped over end of
the rod and adjusted from outside of leg with buckskin strings; as leg
is flexed in act of walking, the rod is forced through the hickory bar,
stretching the web and forcing the lower part of the leg forward in
position for next step; when lower part of leg is flexed at right angles
with the thigh, as in sitting, the pressure of spring is automatically
released. This change simplifies the knee-joint construction, is lighter
and more convenient of adjustment.

Figs. 262 and 263 illustrate a new knee joint for amputation below the
knee. This is the latest and decidedly the most compact, lightest, and
at the same time the best wearing joint that we have ever adopted, not
excepting the ball-bearing joint, and is recommended in all cases.

Joints of medium weight are usually applied. A heavier joint of same
pattern is used, however, when the wearer is unusually heavy or desires
an extra strong joint and does not mind the additional weight. Let us see
if we can describe the uniqueness of it, so that it will be understood.

The head of the joint is very thin (three-eighths of an inch), permitting
the trousers to set smoothly; at the same time there is as much wearing
surface as in an ordinary joint of twice the thickness. C is a phosphor
bronze (the toughest of metal) taper bushing fitted into a taper hole.
B is a taper bolt fitting a taper hole in the bushing; when drawn into
place with screw A, the bushing is wedged into male joint head E tightly,
so that it is practically a part of this male head. In swinging the leg
the movement or wear is on the bolt B inside the cone bushing, giving as
much wearing surface as a joint with male head as thick as this bushing
is long. Perhaps it will be better understood by reference to separate
cuts of the bolt B and bushing C, and stating that the bolt turns or
moves inside the bushing only, and that there is no wearing surface
except between these two parts.

Parts A, B and C are all made to a size and interchangeable. Any one of
them taken from stock will fit any joint head of this pattern without
special fitting, so that it may be conveniently replaced in case of wear.


_The Haberl Patent Foot With Tarsal Articulation_

[Illustration: 264 265]

The novelty of this invention is in the point of articulation being near
the bottom of the foot instead of at the ankle. It does not give as much
motion as the ankle-jointed foot, but is much superior to the rigid ankle
without a joint. The construction is so simple that little explanation is
required. The dotted lines in No. 264 represent hickory plates, covered
with sponge rubber, and No. 265 shows the manner in which the parts are
put together. The heel part is slipped into the round hole in hollow of
foot, and the piece taking the place of the ball and toe part of foot
is passed through into the heel part, as shown by dotted lines in No.
264, and locked together with a steel pin, making a complete hinge. In
finishing, the sponge rubber parts are covered with buckskin or kid. The
entire arrangement is so simple there is very slight probability that any
repairs will be required that the wearer cannot make himself, and the
ease and little expense with which the parts can be renewed commend it
to all who require a strong, serviceable leg. It seems to be a favorite
among miners and others following rough, heavy work who have given it a
trial.

Under contract with the patentee we have the exclusive right to
manufacture this foot in the United States and Canada. We have made a
good many of them, and have yet to hear the first complaint from any of
the wearers. Wood or leather lacing sockets may be used with this foot.
Price of leg with the Haberl foot, for any amputation above the ankle,
$75, with five-year warranty.

    NOTE.—This foot is patented in the United States, Great
    Britain, Canada, Germany, France and Spain.


_Attachment for use in place of Thigh Lacer and Knee-joint_

In most cases of amputation below the knee, if stump is sound and of
good length, it is possible to comfortably use a leg without the steel
knee-joint and thigh support. Many express a desire to try a leg of this
description, but hesitate to have a leg so constructed, fearing the
result of continually taking the entire weight or bearing on the stump,
with no provision for relieving it. For such as would like to try, at
their convenience and pleasure, a leg without the thigh support, we make
attachment No. 211. The thigh lacer and upper joints can be removed by
taking the knee-joint bolts out and this attachment substituted. At such
times and in such work, when the thigh support would be more desirable,
it can be readily replaced. This attachment is included with the $100
WALKEASY leg without extra charge; with any other style of leg, price $5.

[Illustration: 211 212 213]


_Neverchafe Spring Socket_

This is a leather socket moulded over a cast of the stump, and suspended
to the inner side of a wooden socket or shell with adjustable rubber
webbing in such a manner as to avoid all friction or chafing of the stump
and to give a comfortable, helpful spring at each step of the wearer,
the sensation being much the same as though the weight were on an air
cushion, with no pressure on the end of the stump whatever. No. 212 for
amputation below the knee; No. 213 for amputation above the knee.

This socket is particularly suitable for short stumps. The inner socket,
being made of stiff leather, practically lengthens the stump, giving
increased leverage, a condition greatly to be desired in such cases. It
is also a very great relief to tender and sensitive stumps; the slipping
and rubbing occasioned more or less in walking on an artificial leg,
takes place with this attachment between the inner spring socket and the
outer wood socket; the pressure of the springs keeping the inner socket
snugly against the stump in all positions, precludes the possibility of
any friction on the stump.

For stumps that become swollen in hot weather, or that require extra
covering in cool weather, or for such as have never used an artificial
leg, with the consequent probability of the stump rapidly reducing, this
inner socket may be made adjustable by lacing.

While this is undoubtedly the most suitable and comfortable socket for
very short and sensitive stumps, some prefer the highly polished wooden
socket, and others the adjustable leather lacing socket. All purchasers
of the WALKEASY leg have their choice of socket; the selection should
be influenced by the length and condition of the stump, the weight and
occupation of the wearer, and other considerations. In all cases we
guarantee a comfortable socket and one that will not chafe.


_New Adjustable Leather Lacing Socket_

This new socket is for amputation below the knee. The adjustment is made
at the back of the socket instead of at the front, as in the lacing
sockets heretofore made. The improvement is so marked that the wonder
is we did not make the change earlier. Much of the weight on the stump
is taken just where the socket was previously made to open, and it was
necessary to reinforce the lacing with a strap. When laced in the back
of socket the front is stronger, more comfortable, and dresses more
smoothly; furthermore, there is more shrinkage of a stump in the calf
than in front; and in being able to make the adjustment in the back part
of the socket, it is kept nearer the shape that will conform to the shape
of the stump than when laced in front. This socket is illustrated in the
various engravings representing legs for below the knee amputation. See
frontispiece, No. 204, No. 227 and No. 228.

[Illustration]




PART II


In this part we give descriptions and illustrations of ordinary styles
of legs, such as we have made here—with various modifications and
improvements, as suggested by time, wear and experience—for forty-five
years. Excepting the WALKEASY leg, described in Part I, there are no
better nor more reliable artificial limbs made anywhere by anyone, _and
the prices are much below_ those charged by other manufacturers.

The various styles are:

    Wooden foot with ball-and-socket ankle joint and wooden socket.

    Wooden foot with ball-and-socket ankle joint and leather lacing
    socket.

    Wooden foot with hinge ankle joint (army and navy or two-ball)
    and wooden socket.

    Wooden foot with hinge ankle joint (army and navy or two-ball)
    and adjustable leather lacing socket.

    Foot with sponge-rubber or felt removable sole and rigid ankle
    and wooden socket.

    Foot with rigid ankle and adjustable leather lacing socket.

The cords and springs used in the legs with articulated ankle joints are
the same as are used in the WALKEASY leg. The springs are rubber used by
compression, imparting easy, uniform motion, their power and action being
regulated by simply turning a nut, so that the wearer may adjust them to
suit his own peculiar gait.

In walking, when the weight of the body rests on the ball of the
foot, the spring in the back part of the leg (heel spring) is firmly
compressed, and when the weight of the body is thrown forward on to the
other foot the spring rises and carries the foot forward to its place
with very little effort of the wearer, assisting greatly in carrying the
weight of the leg.

The prices for legs described in this part, for amputation at any point
above the ankle, are, including suspenders, stump socks, etc., complete:

    $50, warranted for one year.

    $60, warranted for three years.

    $70, warranted for five years.

A copy of the warranty is given on page 18.

Just as good a leg in every way is made for $50 as is made for $70, the
difference in price being determined wholly by the time the warranty is
made to cover.

If undetermined as to which leg would be best adapted to any particular
case, and it is left to our judgment to select, upon receipt of
measurements and full particulars we will construct the one we honestly
and conscientiously believe will give the most lasting and comfortable
service. We are equally interested with the purchaser in doing this,
as the continued good name of our establishment, as well as our future
prosperity, depend wholly upon the durability of our work and the comfort
with which it is worn.


_Ball-and-Socket Ankle Joint_

This joint is formed by a polished glass ball plying in a socket of
vulcanite, the foot and ankle being joined together with four tendons,
passing through rubber springs in the ankle; this joint admits of every
motion the natural ankle has. In walking on the side of a hill or
inclined plane, or where the foot is used to brace the body, the ankle
flexes laterally and the foot remains flat on the ground, thus giving a
firm base of support. The motion closely imitates the movement of the
natural ankle, and this joint is desirable for light work and short,
tender stumps. Notwithstanding it is more complicated than any of our
other styles, requiring more care and attention, there are hundreds
of people using it with such comfort and satisfaction that under no
circumstances whatever could they be induced to use any other. No. 216,
on page 40.


_Double Ball-and-Socket Ankle Joint_

This joint is a unique invention, and the idea of its construction
was suggested by the single ball-and-socket joint. It consists of two
polished glass balls plying in sockets of fibre. There is no substance
that could be used for this purpose that presents a harder, smoother
surface than glass, and when in the shape of solid polished spheres,
plying in perfectly fitted sockets, they are practically indestructible;
there is no such thing as wearing them out. A linked steel rod and a back
and front tendon securely connect the foot and ankle. The tendons, also
the rubber springs, are the same as used in all of our legs, and are
applied in the same manner. This is a somewhat lighter joint than the
army and navy joint and is recommended for persons of light or medium
weight. No. 217, on page 40.


_Army and Navy Ankle Joint_

The axis of this joint consists of a hollow steel bolt securely fastened
in the foot with two vertical rods with nuts at the lower ends. The bolt
is stationary in the foot, the ankle working on the upper surface of the
bolt, leaving no possible chance for an accumulation of any grit or dirt,
thus making a self-cleaning joint. The steel rod, together with the front
and back cords, connects the foot and the ankle. Provision is made for
tightening the ankle rod with a nut on the upper end, so as to regulate
the friction on the bolt and to compensate for any wear that may take
place at the joint. This is recommended as being the strongest and most
serviceable of the wooden feet. No. 218.


_A New Foot with Rigid Ankle_

This is not properly a rubber foot, but a modification of the so-called
rubber foot suggested by improvements on our WALKEASY foot. In the
construction of the old-style rubber foot a wooden core is covered with
rubber and properly cured or vulcanized by heat. It is impossible to
strengthen or reinforce this wooden core with a covering of rawhide as is
done on the other parts of an artificial leg, because the heat necessary
in vulcanizing the rubber burns and ruins the rawhide. This is obviated
by the method of construction of this new foot.

The upper part of the foot is firmly attached to the ankle part by a pin,
and the entire wood part is covered with rawhide. Thus the upper part
of the foot forms practically one piece with the ankle, and strength is
gained without adding weight. The sponge-rubber removable sole is fitted
into a recess channeled in the foot and is securely held in place by one
screw. No rubber is used at the top of the foot, but more is used on the
sole where it is most needed.

If a foot needs be made extremely light a fine quality of felt is used in
place of the rubber. The felt does not give as much spring and elasticity
to the tread of the foot as the sponge rubber, and nothing is gained by
using it except reduction in weight.

[Illustration: 216 217 218 267]

To prevent wear at the part corresponding with the toe joint of the
natural foot, layers of canvas are cemented on the upper surface of the
rubber sole where it comes in contact with the extreme forward part of
the wooden portion. Should the rubber sole give way or wear out, the worn
part, or indeed the entire sole, may be renewed at small expense without
the necessity of replacing the entire foot as in the old style of rubber
foot.

Altogether this is a lighter, stronger and more serviceable foot, more
easily and inexpensively kept in order. A sectional view of this foot is
shown in No. 267.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: 220 221 222 223]

    NUMBER 220

    Full length leg for thigh amputation, with wooden foot, ankle
    joint No. 216, 217 or 218, and adjustable leather lacing
    socket. Price, complete, $50, warranted for one year; $60,
    three years; $70, five years.

    NUMBER 221

    Full length leg for thigh amputation, with wooden foot, ankle
    joint No. 216, 217 or 218, and wooden socket. Price, complete,
    $50, warranted for one year; $60, three years; $70, five years.

    NUMBER 222

    Full length leg for thigh amputation, with new foot, with rigid
    ankle No. 267, and adjustable leather lacing socket. Price,
    complete, $50, warranted for one year; $60, three years; $70,
    five years.

    NUMBER 223

    Full length leg for thigh amputation, with new foot, with
    rigid ankle No. 267, and wooden socket. Price, complete, $50,
    warranted for one year; $60, three years; $70, five years.

[Illustration: 224 225 226 227]

    NUMBER 224

    Knee-bearing leg for amputation below the knee when the knee
    joint is stiff and inflexible, or when stump is too short for
    the successful use of a socket leg; new foot with rigid ankle
    No. 267, and leather socket. Price, complete, $50, warranted
    for one year; $60, three years; $70, five years.

    The sockets on Nos. 224 and 225 may be transposed, using the
    leather socket on No. 225 or the wooden socket on No. 224.

    NUMBER 225

    Knee-bearing leg for amputation below the knee when the knee
    joint is stiff and inflexible, or when stump is too short for
    the successful use of a socket leg; wooden foot, ankle joint
    No. 216, 217 or 218, and wooden socket. Price, complete, $50,
    warranted one year; $60, three years; $70, five years.

    Leg for knee-joint amputation is made similar to the
    knee-bearing legs and prices are the same. The upper part of
    leg for this kind of amputation is made same as shown by No.
    203 on page 26.

    NUMBER 226

    Leg for amputation below the knee, wooden foot, ankle joint
    No. 216, 217 or 218, and wooden socket. Price, complete, $50,
    warranted for one year; $60, three years; $70, five years.

    NUMBER 227

    Leg for amputation below the knee, wooden foot, ankle joint No.
    216, 217 or 218, and adjustable leather lacing socket. Price,
    complete, $50, warranted for one year; $60, three years; $70,
    five years.

[Illustration: 228 229 230 231]

    NUMBER 228

    Leg for amputation below the knee, with new foot, with rigid
    ankle No. 267, and adjustable leather lacing socket. Price,
    complete, $50, warranted for one year; $60, three years; $70,
    five years.

    NUMBER 229

    Leg for amputation below the knee, with new foot, with rigid
    ankle No. 267, and wooden socket. Price, complete, $50,
    warranted for one year; $60, three years; $70, five years.

    NUMBER 230

    Leg for amputation below the knee, without knee joints or thigh
    support. This style of leg is hardly suitable for stumps less
    than six inches in length. With a sound stump of sufficient
    length it may be worn with much satisfaction, as it is about
    one-third lighter than one with the knee joints and thigh band,
    and the wearer experiences much less restraint in its use, both
    in walking and sitting. It is, however, not recommended if the
    stump is sore or sensitive, as the entire pressure or bearing
    must be taken on the stump, with no provision for relieving it
    as with the leg with thigh band. No. 230 shows the leg with
    new foot, with rigid ankle No. 267, and adjustable leather
    lacing socket. A wooden socket with the same foot will be used
    if desired. Price, complete, $45, warranted for one year; $55,
    three years; $65, five years. If this leg is purchased, and it
    subsequently proves unsatisfactory, knee joints and thigh bands
    will be put on for $10.

    NUMBER 231

    Leg for amputation below the knee, without knee joints or thigh
    support, wooden foot, ankle joint No. 216, 217 or 218, and
    wooden socket, or adjustable leather lacing socket if desired.
    Price, complete, $45, warranted for one year; $55, three years;
    $65, five years. Any time after leg is finished joints and
    thigh band will be put on for $10.


_Amputations at or below the Ankle Joint_

Amputations at or below the ankle joint are usually performed with the
expectation that much of the weight of the body can be borne on the end
of the stump or plantar surface of the remaining part of the foot, and in
most cases this can be done. Owing to the little space below the end of
the stump, it is desirable, with few exceptions, to construct feet for
these amputations without articulated ankle joints.

[Illustration: 232 233 234 235 236 237 270]

    NUMBER 232

    Leg for ankle-joint (Symes) operation, with new foot with rigid
    ankle No. 267, without knee joints or thigh support. Price,
    complete, $40, warranted for one year; $50, three years; $60,
    five years.

    NUMBER 233

    Leg for ankle-joint (Symes) amputation, with new foot with
    rigid ankle No. 267, with knee joints and thigh support, used
    when little or no pressure or weight can be taken on the end of
    the stump. Price, complete, $50, warranted for one year; $60,
    three years; $70, five years.

    NUMBER 234

    Stump after amputation through or near the instep.

    NUMBER 235

    Appliance for partial amputation of foot. The foot is made of
    wood, covered with rawhide, and has an articulated toe joint;
    leather sheath coming up above the ankle, laced in front.
    Price, $25.

    NUMBER 236

    Appliance for amputation through the instep similar to No. 235,
    with sheath extending well up on the leg, and laced in the
    back. Price, $30.

    NUMBER 237

    Appliance for partial amputation of foot. Wooden foot, toe
    joint, leather sheath extending to the knee, with side joints.
    This is used when little or no weight can be taken on the end
    of stump, the weight being supported by the leather sheath on
    the leg below the knee. Price, $40.

    NUMBER 270

    An entirely new style of foot for amputation at the ankle
    joint. The leather sheath encases the stump from the knee
    to the end. The articulated joint is made by putting the
    bolt or cylinder entirely through the foot, giving a good
    wearing surface similar to the artificial knee joint used for
    amputations above the knee. If there is little room below end
    of stump the foot would be made of hard wood.


_Peg Legs_

These low-priced legs are carefully fitted, and, excepting No. 242,
are covered with rawhide and enameled the same as the legs with feet.
They have heavy iron ferrules screwed to the bottom, in which a rubber
cushion is used. If desired at some future time, a foot and ankle may be
attached. Measurements, mould, profiles, etc., same as for leg with foot,
excepting that no foot measurements are required, and length of sound leg
should be taken with shoe on.

The prices include suspenders and stump stock.

[Illustration: 238 239 240 241 242]

    NUMBER 238

    Peg leg without knee joint, for amputation above the knee;
    wooden socket; adjustable leather lacing socket used if
    preferred. Price, including suspenders, $18.

    NUMBER 239

    Peg leg with knee joint, for amputation above the knee; shown
    with wooden socket; adjustable leather lacing socket used if
    preferred; automatic lock, making knee stiff in standing;
    pressing the button in the back part of joint releases the knee
    lock so that joint may be flexed in sitting. Price, including
    suspenders, $25.

    NUMBER 240

    Peg leg with wooden socket, for amputation below the knee.
    Price, including suspenders, if desired, $25.

    NUMBER 241

    Peg leg with adjustable leather lacing socket, for amputation
    below the knee. Price, including suspenders, if desired, $25.

    NUMBER 242

    Skeleton peg leg for amputation below the knee, to be used with
    knee resting on pad. The measurements required: distance from
    knee to floor, diameter through the knee from side to side
    outside clothing. State whether for right or left leg. Price $8.


_Suspenders_

All artificial legs for thigh amputations require support from shoulders
or waist. For amputations at or below the knee, except ankle joint and
partial foot amputations, it is desirable to have suspenders attached
for beginners. Many, however, discard them after a time. All legs that
we make requiring suspenders are equipped with them, any form desired,
without extra charge. We are not confined to the styles illustrated; they
will be modified to suit the purchaser or any peculiarities of the case.

[Illustration: 252 253 254 255 256 257]

    NUMBER 252

    Suspender for leg amputation with forked straps to be attached
    to artificial leg below the knee; heavy elastic web between the
    buckle and fork; this is a popular style. Price, $1.50.

    NUMBER 253

    A waist belt for women to which elastic straps are attached
    in back and front, or the forked strap in front only. This is
    for amputation below the knee. It is, however, often used in
    connection with suspenders, which pass over the shoulders, on
    legs for thigh amputation. Price, complete for leg amputation,
    $2.

    NUMBER 254

    For women. Corset with roller suspenders attached to waist
    belt, used when amputation is above the knee. This is a much
    more convenient and comfortable support for women than any kind
    of suspender straps. The belt or straps can be made to attach
    to any corset. Price, including corset, $5.

    NUMBER 255

    Roller suspenders for leg for thigh amputation. Crossed or
    looped behind and looped in front if desired. Price, $4.

    NUMBER 256

    The roller or pulley used on the roller suspenders. The action
    of the straps under these rollers prevents drawing over the
    shoulders, in stooping, sitting or lying down, the suspenders
    remaining stationary on the shoulders. Price, 25 cents each.

    NUMBER 257

    Suspenders, partial elastic, of the ordinary pattern, for thigh
    amputation; riveted so as to swivel on a leather strap laced
    around the upper part of the socket. Price, $3.

The back part of the sockets of all legs for thigh amputations is padded.
This prevents the wear and cutting of the clothing when sitting on a hard
seat of any kind. Without the padding, destruction of the clothing can
hardly be avoided.

[Illustration: 258 259]


_Fitting Tool_

    NUMBER 258. There are changes in stumps from time to time
    requiring slight smoothing or easing out in the socket. A
    wooden socket can most conveniently and effectually be cut out
    with one of these fitting tools, such as are used by artificial
    limb makers. Price, $1.50.


_Stump Socks_

    NUMBER 259. Socks made from soft woolen yarn are the most
    convenient and comfortable covering that can be worn on a
    stump, with or without an artificial leg. With a properly
    fitted socket, either wood or leather, it is as much padding
    as is required. To compensate for shrinkage of the stump,
    two or three extra socks may be added from time to time as
    required. It is desirable, however, if the stump has become so
    much reduced that more covering than this is needed, to have
    the socket lined with leather or felt, and if it should still
    further reduce, a new socket or top is the best remedy.


PRICE LIST

Delivered by mail or express on receipt of price.

    =================+================+=======+=======
         Length of   |Circumference at| Price | Price
           Sock      | largest part of|  Each |  per
                     |     Stump      |       | Dozen
    -----------------+----------------+-------+-------
    10 inches or less|Under 15 inches | $0.35 | $3.50
    10 to 16 inches  |Under 15 inches |   .45 |  4.50
    10 to 16 inches  |Over  15 inches |   .55 |  5.50
    16 to 22 inches  |Under 15 inches |   .55 |  5.50
    16 to 22 inches  |Over  15 inches |   .65 |  6.50
    22 to 28 inches  |Under 15 inches |   .65 |  6.50
    22 to 28 inches  |Over  15 inches |   .75 |  7.50
    28 to 34 inches  |Under 15 inches |   .75 |  7.50
    28 to 34 inches  |Over  15 inches |   .85 |  8.50
    -----------------+----------------+-------+-------

One-fourth or one-half dozen at dozen rates.

Length of sock should be two or three inches longer than the remaining
part of the mutilated leg.

State whether amputation is above, below, or at the knee; give length and
circumference at top and two inches from the end of stump.


_Artificial Legs for Deformities_

We make limbs for all manner of deformities, each one specially designed
and constructed to conform to the individual peculiarities. With a
fair degree of strength in the deficient limb, comfortable support
and probability of easy locomotion are assured the wearers of these
appliances. Rubber or wooden foot can be used. Prices vary from $50 to
$100, according to the difficulties to be overcome in proper construction
and comfortable fitting. After receiving full description, exact price
will be given. A plaster mould or cast of the deformed limb should be
forwarded, together with measurements of sound limb, same as in case of
an amputation.

[Illustration: 243 244]

    NUMBER 243

    This cut represents one of the more difficult of the many legs
    we are called upon to make for malformations. This particular
    limb was made from measurements and cast of deformed leg (No.
    244) without the presence of the applicant at the factory.
    After one or two trials in the rough it was finished and is
    being used with the utmost satisfaction.


_Price List of Supplies_

    Elastic Web, 5 inches wide, per yard                           $1.00

    Elastic Web, heavy, 2 inches wide, per yard                      .60

    Elastic Web, heavy, 1½ inches wide, per yard                     .50

    Elastic Web, heavy, 1 inch wide, per yard                        .40

    Elastic Web, heavy, ¾ inch wide, per yard                        .30

    Non-elastic Web, cotton, 2 inches wide, per yard                 .20

    Non-elastic Web, cotton, 1½ inches wide, per yard                .15

    Non-elastic Web, worsted, tubular, 2 inches wide, per yard       .30

    Buckle, brass, 2 inches wide, each                               .05

    Buckle Roller, single prong, ⅞, ¾ or ⅝ inch wide, each           .05

    Buckle Snaps                                                     .05

    Felt, best fine wool, per ounce                                  .25

    Knee Spring, made from 5-inch web, complete, each               1.00

    Knee Spring Rod, C, cut No. 260, each                           1.25

    Knee Bolt, for amputation above knee, complete, each            1.50

    Knee Bolt End Screw, each                                        .25

    Knee Cord, with adjustable attachment, each                     1.00

    Knee Cord, without adjustable attachment, each                   .50

    Knee Joint Bolts and Screws, each                                .25

    Bushings for same, each                                          .05

    Lacing Strings, rawhide or buckskin, each                        .10

    Lacing Hooks, each 3 cents, per dozen                            .25

    Lacing Eyelets, ¼ or ⁵⁄₁₆ inch, per dozen                        .10

    Ankle Cords, with adjustable top, complete with spring;
        heel, each                                                  1.00

    Ankle Cords, with adjustable top, complete with spring;
        front or side, each                                          .75

    Ankle-Cord Loops, without top or spring, each                    .50

    Ankle-Cord Springs, heel or front, each                          .20

    Ankle-Cord Wrench, each                                          .25

    Ankle Bolt, steel, each                                         1.25

    Ball Socket for ball-and-socket ankle, each                      .50

    Rotary Stopper for ball-and-socket ankle, each                   .50

    Toe Cord or Rod with Bracket, each                               .25

    Toe-Spring Rubber, each                                          .15

    Toe Fasteners, each                                              .10

    Rubber Cushion for bottom of peg leg, 2 inches diameter, each    .50

Sent post-paid on receipt of price.

In ordering cords, if with the screw tops, give length from inside
of loop at one end to the other extreme end; if without the screw
attachment, give length from inside of loop at one extreme end to inside
of loop at the other extreme end.


_Price List for Repairs_

    Neverchafe Socket, for amputation above or below the knee.
        Inner leather, $5.00; outer wooden shell, $15.00; both    $20.00

    Wooden Socket, for amputation above or below the knee          15.00

    Leather Lacing Socket, for amputation above or below the knee  15.00

    New Knee, complete, for thigh amputation leg                   15.00

    New Knee, upper part only                                       8.00

    New Knee, lower part only                                       7.00

    New Walkeasy Ankle                                             15.00

    New Walkeasy Foot, sponge-rubber sole                          15.00

    New Walkeasy Foot and Ankle                                    25.00

    New Wooden Foot                                                10.00

    New Rubber Foot with rigid ankle                               10.00

    New Foot and Ankle; wooden foot with ankle joint, or rubber
        foot with rigid ankle                                      15.00

    New Knee Joints                                                 7.00

    New Thigh Lacer, for amputation below the knee                  3.00

    Covering leg with rawhide and enameling, for thigh amputation   7.00

    Covering leg with rawhide and enameling, for leg amputation     5.00

For other repairs, difficult of enumeration, a charge of 50 cents per
hour will be made.




PART III

ARTIFICIAL ARMS


The construction of artificial arms may be said to have commenced with
the sixteenth century. “The distinguished Chevalier Göetz fought at
the head of the army of Margrave Frederick from 1504 to 1562 with an
artificial iron hand. The fingers of this hand were closed one after the
other by the action of several springs. We are further informed that
this hand, which possessed enormous weight, enclosed the stump, and was
attached to the armor which covered the body.”

During the sixteenth century many very defective artificial arms were
made, which, however, served the purpose for which they were intended, as
they enabled the wearers to engage in battle, guide their horses, etc.
The artificial hand being once attached to the weapon or bridle rein,
mechanism for articulating the fingers was not deemed necessary.

Ambrose Parè, a noted French physician, born in 1500, and called the
father of French surgery, describes an artificial hand made of iron, with
more perfect mechanism than the one worn by Göetz; in this hand the thumb
is immovable and all the fingers are opened and closed simultaneously
under the influence of a single spring.

During Ambrose Parè’s time efforts were made to restore natural movements
of the lost parts in order to enable the maimed to perform all ordinary
labor. Leather, paper, and other metals were substituted for iron.
Parè leaves a figure of a leather hand, but without details as to its
mechanism; it is apparently made with immovable fingers and thumb, but
with a sheath inserted between the thumb and index finger for receiving
a pen, etc. He further describes an artificial forearm, which can, by
the aid of the sound hand, be brought into any degree of flexion and
maintained there by the use of a pawl caught into meshes of a cog wheel.
The artificial arms described by Ambrose Parè, although extremely heavy,
seem to have been in favor until the latter part of the eighteenth
century; at this time a monk of the order of Carmelites designed a hand
made of sheet tin, with movable fingers and thumb, to be articulated by
movement of the stump, but we are informed that it was too complicated to
be used with any degree of success except in cases of amputation near the
wrist joint. We have a description of an arm made subsequently of leather
and covered with sheepskin, colored in such a manner as to represent the
appearance of the human skin, and to make it appear more natural the
nails were made of white horn. The improvements in the hand were mostly
in the appearance, without any important addition to its utility or
usefulness.

In 1818 a Dr. Graefe suggested the construction of an arm susceptible
of manipulation by means of cords attached to a corset surrounding the
shoulders, the arm to be moved without the aid of the sound hand. This
principle of attachment for the movement of the forearm and fingers is
followed to the present time with various modifications.

The early history of artificial arms seems to refer mainly to their
special construction and application for people of renown who had
suffered the loss of their natural extremities. Until a comparatively
recent period the impracticability, on account of complicated heavy
mechanism, and the great expense of these appliances, precluded anything
like a general demand for their use. As the inventive geniuses of modern
times have devised and produced so many labor and time-saving instruments
and machines, that are, however useful, nevertheless the cause of much
horrible mutilation of humanity, so also have they in some measure made
compensation to the maimed by the progress and improvement attained in
the utility of the appliances for the substitution of lost members.
Simplicity of mechanism, the application of extremely light material in
such a manner as to preserve the necessary strength, are the prominent
features of progress in artificial arm construction, and in combination
with the prevailing moderate prices, bring them into popular favor with
those who have use for them.

However light, strong and mechanically perfect an arm and hand may
be made, its success or failure—provided the stump is sound and
of sufficient length—depends much upon the continued patience and
perseverance of the wearer in getting accustomed to its use. The
preservation of the form and the general improvement in the appearance
produced by a properly constructed and comfortably fitted arm, to say
nothing of its usefulness and convenience, should be an incentive to
persistent effort on the part of the wearer to habituate himself to it,
and if this is practiced for a few weeks there need be no fear of the
ultimate result.


_Sockets for the Stumps_

For amputation below the elbow the neatest and best fitting socket is
made from specially prepared stiff leather moulded over a cast of the
stump, supported with a framework of steel and lined with buckskin or
kid. The advantages over a wooden socket are that it is less clumsy,
adheres more closely to the stump, that there is no danger of splitting,
and withal is equally as durable. We make them, however, of wood if
desired. For amputation above the elbow the artificial elbow is made of
wood, and it is sometimes desirable to extend the wood upward in one
piece to form the socket.


_Aluminum_

Much has been anticipated and hoped for in artificial limb work from this
new and extremely light metal, but it has proved objectionable for any
parts in both arms and legs that come in near contact with the stumps,
owing to the rapid oxidization that takes place from perspiration, and
its practical use is confined to fingers, toes, and such other minor
fixtures as are not likely to come in contact with any part of the body.


_Artificial Hands_

Whatever their mechanical perfection, artificial hands can, in fact,
possess but one useful quality, that of seizing objects like pincers.
In nearly every act performed by the natural fingers are combined
flexion, extension, prehension, and many other different movements; this
combination no mechanic has ever been able—and probably none ever will be
able—to successfully reproduce in an artificial hand. It is, therefore,
practically useless that the fingers should be movable, since a less
complicated, lighter and stronger hand can be made with fingers rigid,
in a half-closed, natural position, articulating the thumb only, which
results in a more powerful spring and consequently a greater degree of
firm grasping power. The fingers being strengthened with steel plates
running through them, reinforced with a covering of rawhide, and securely
fastened to the hand, heavy objects may be lifted without danger of the
fingers straightening out and the object dropping to the ground.

While we furnish the hand with movable fingers, and the rubber hand
with ductile rubber fingers, the wooden hand with rigid fingers and
movable thumb is recommended as giving the most practical, durable, and
satisfactory service.


_The Color_

Artificial hands are covered with a delicately tinted enamel, as nearly a
flesh color as it is possible to make; but in order that they may be less
conspicuous and the illusion more complete a glove should be worn at all
times. We furnish a pair of gloves with each hand.


_Tools and Implements_

Tools and implements in almost limitless variety can be used in an arm
in place of the hand. Those most frequently used are the plain hook,
double hook, ring, knife, fork, brush, and spoon. People who have never
worn arms hardly know what will be of service to them. Special tools
are required for special work, and these can be subsequently provided
when it has been determined what will be most useful. With all arms with
detachable hands, or rubber hands with the palm socket, we furnish a
plain hook, knife, fork, and brush, without extra charge, or the price
of any of these implements that are not wanted will be deducted from the
price of the arm.


_Finger Construction_

Usually the fingers for artificial hands are made of a single piece
of wood, and it is obvious if the finger is curved or flexed that at
some point the grain of the wood will be directly across the finger and
will quickly break if subjected to any considerable strain. To obviate
this difficulty we make the fingers for the wooden hands of two pieces
of wood; on one side the grain or fibre runs lengthwise, and on the
other crosswise, and between these two pieces of wood is placed a steel
plate, and all are firmly riveted together, the steel plate projecting
sufficiently to be securely riveted to the hand. The fingers are next
entirely covered with rawhide, which, together with the other precautions
taken against breakage, make them sufficiently strong to support the
weight of the wearer. See No. 300, page 64.


_Partial Amputation of Hand_

No. 301 (page 64) represents a stump after partial amputation of the
hand, leaving free use of thumb, but it is with difficulty that this
can be brought in contact with the remaining stump so as to be of
service. No. 302 represents, for stumps of this description, a wooden
sheath, terminating in immovable fingers partially closed, the hand
being attached to the wrist and forearm by means of a leather lacing
attachment. The sheath is covered with rawhide and enameled, and the
fingers made as shown in No. 300. Price $40.

Should there be amputation at the base of two or three fingers only,
with no impairment in the movements of the remaining one or two, so that
they can be brought in firm contact with the thumb, what is left of such
a mutilated hand is far more useful than anything that can possibly be
made to supplement it, but to conceal the loss and give the hand a more
perfect appearance, fingers can be made and applied as represented by No.
302, over which a glove should be worn.

Nos. 303 and 304 (page 64) show an apparatus useful in all kinds of labor
for persons who have undergone a partial amputation of the hand. It
consists of a leather sheath, laced to the forearm. Attached to the under
surface of this sheath is a steel plate, which extends downward under the
stump, turning up slightly at the end. At the end is an aperture through
which it is possible to slip the handles of tools and implements, passing
them beneath the stump, where they are securely held in place by pressure
of the stump. Price $20.

[Illustration: 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313
314 316 317]

No. 305 represents a stump after an amputation of all the fingers and
thumb, and No. 306 an artificial wooden hand for same, with stationary
fingers and articulated thumb with a powerful spring to be opened with
the assistance of the sound hand. Price $40.


_Rubber Hand_

With the assistance of the other hand, or by pressing against some
resisting body, the ductile rubber fingers of the hand No. 307 may be
changed in position to suit the needs of the wearer as shown by the
dotted lines in the illustration. For those who prefer the rubber to the
wooden hand it will be furnished with any of the arms we make. It can
be attached permanently to the forearm, detachable at the wrist, with
provision for using a hook of other implement in place of the hand, or
furnished with a palm socket and lock for the use of hook, knife, fork,
etc., without removing the hand. See No. 308.


_Connections_

No. 309 represents a new method for connecting the hand and arm.
Heretofore the devices in use could not be absolutely relied upon to keep
the hand or tools in place. It mattered not how strongly the fingers were
made for lifting heavy weights, the customary spring or set-screw used
for locking this connection was liable to loosen or give way without
warning and cause much annoyance, if not injury. On the hand plate two
studs are riveted, the heads of which pass into keyholes in the arm
plate. With a slight turn of the hand the heads pass into the slots of
the keyholes, bringing the heads of the studs under the arm plate; they
are kept immovable with a spring that automatically slips into a slot in
the edge of the plate; the spring is released by a pressure of the thumb
of the sound hand in twisting the artificial hand off. The hook and other
tools have a lug at the end of the spindle or shank; after passing the
shank through the hole in the center of the arm plate, it is turned to
any desired position and held firmly in place with the wing nut, as shown
in No. 310.

[Illustration: 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325]


_Some of the Implements_

Some of the implements that may be attached in the wrist plate when the
hand is removed are also shown in the illustration. All excepting the
brush are made of steel, or other suitable metal.

    No. 310—Single Hook                  Price $1.00
    No. 311—Brush                          ”    1.00
    No. 312—Spoon                          ”    1.00
    No. 313—Table Knife                    ”    1.00
    No. 314—Table Fork                     ”    1.00
    No. 316—Double Hook                    ”    3.00
    No. 317—Ring                           ”    2.00

Special knife, fork, brush, and hook will be made for use in the palm of
rubber hand, No. 308, without additional charge. Other tools, such as
pincers, claw hook, clevis, etc., will be made to order when desired.


_Wrist Joint Amputations_

These usually leave a stump somewhat larger at the end than immediately
above (see No. 318, page 64), thus providing a means of securely applying
the arm and keeping it in place without the necessity of attachment above
the elbow, as shown in No. 319.

Attachments above the elbow may, however, be put on if thought best, and
for amputation at or a short distance above the wrist it is preferable
to make the connection at the elbow with leather straps, as shown in No.
320, rather than with steel joints.

The socket of any arm for amputation between wrist and elbow will be made
to lace if desired.


PRICES, NOS. 319 AND 320 (See page 66)

    With wood or rubber hand, permanently attached to forearm,
        no provision for tools, and without attachment above
        the elbow                                                 $30.00

    The same with attachment above the elbow                       35.00

    Rubber hand, not detachable at wrist, but with palm socket,
        including knife, fork, hook, and brush, without attachment
        above the elbow                                            35.00

    The same with attachment above the elbow                       40.00

    With wood or rubber hand, detachable at the wrist, including
        knife, fork, hook, and brush, without attachment above
        the elbow                                                  40.00

    The same with attachment above the elbow                       45.00

No. 321 represents arm for amputation below the elbow, leather socket
and leather lacer above the elbow, both reinforced with steel frame,
connected at elbow with steel joint straps.

No. 322 is a detachable wooden hand, with rigid fingers and movable
thumb. A traction rod for opening the thumb with motion of shoulder is
shown in the illustration; a web strap is buttoned to the upper end of
the traction rod and passes over opposite shoulder, as shown in No. 326,
page 70. Any motion of the shoulder that will draw on this rod will open
the thumb, and when the tension is released a strong spring in the thumb
brings it back in contact with the first finger. For single amputations
there is little or no advantage in having this attachment put on; it
necessarily requires more complicated and expensive mechanism, without
any practical gain to the wearer. For double amputations something
of this kind must be depended upon for assistance, and to obtain the
greatest benefit from artificial arms, means similar to this for
operating the movement of the thumb are absolutely required. One or more
movable fingers in conjunction with the thumb may be operated in the same
manner.


PRICES, NO. 321

Including Plain Hook, Knife, Fork, and Brush

    Arm without hand, used as a peg arm; a hand may be
        subsequently applied                                      $25.00

    Arm with wooden or rubber hand, detachable at wrist            50.00

    Arm with wooden hand and traction rod for opening thumb from
        shoulder                                                   60.00


_Ball-and-Socket Wrist Joint_

No. 323 represents arm with ball-and-socket wrist joint for amputation
below the elbow, but not suitable for an amputation near the wrist for
the reason that the space in that locality is required for the mechanism
of the joint. In the various uses to which an artificial hand may be put,
a change in the position of the hand is often desirable; for example,
in keeping a book or paper in position while being written upon with
the sound hand, the artificial hand can be turned so that the tips of
the fingers will rest upon and hold the article securely in place. In
bringing the arm in front of the body the ball-and-socket joint admits
of the hand being brought near to the body in a very easy, lifelike
manner. In other positions desired the hand may be placed at the degree
of flexion most convenient and helpful and that giving the most natural
appearance. No. 332, on page 72, gives an illustration of the details
of the joint. The forearm and attachment above the elbow are leather,
supported with steel framework same as No. 321. Wooden hand with movable
thumb is furnished with or without traction rod for opening thumb with
shoulder movement, but no provision is made for the use of a hook or
other implement in place of the hand. A rubber hand with palm socket for
implements can be attached if preferred, but is somewhat heavier. For
persons not employed in laborious occupations and who have no occasion
to use a hook or similar implement, this style of arm is desirable; for
others we would recommend No. 321.


PRICES, NO. 323

    Without traction rod for opening the thumb                    $50.00

    With traction rod attachment for opening thumb by shoulder
        movement                                                   60.00


_For Deformed Arm_

No. 324, page 66, represents irregularly formed forearm and hand, the
forearm being considerably shorter than the opposite one. No. 325
represents artificial arm and hand made to supply the deficiency. The
hand may be wood or rubber and detachable or not at the wrist, and
provision made for the use of implements the same as in case of an
amputation. These malformations are treated mechanically the same as
amputations. Plaster moulds or casts of the deformed parts are required,
together with measurements of the opposite arm and hand.


PRICES, NO. 325

    With wood or rubber hand                                      $50.00

    With wooden hand, thumb opened by movement of shoulder         60.00


_Manner of Attaching Arm and Straps_

No. 326 illustrates arm for amputation below the elbow, equipped with
shoulder cap, strap passing around body for holding it in place, and the
attachment for opening the thumb by movement of the opposite shoulder. If
thumb is to be opened with the assistance of the sound hand, this extra
strap and traction rod are omitted.

[Illustration: 326]


_Arm for Amputation above the Elbow_

No. 327 on the next page represents a wooden arm for amputation above
the elbow, fitted with cord for raising forearm and locking it at right
angles. This is operated as shown in No. 330, while the mechanism is the
same as shown in detailed drawing No. 332. Wooden or rubber hand No. 328
is furnished permanently attached or detachable, but this arm may be used
as a peg, without hand, hook No. 310 or other implement being used in
place of the hand. It can also be made as a peg without a joint at elbow,
straight or curved to any desired angle.


PRICES, NO. 327

Including Hook, Knife, Fork, and Brush

    Without elbow joint or hand                                   $30.00

    Without hand, but with elbow joint without gearing for
        raising forearm                                            35.00

    Without hand, but with elbow joint with gearing for raising
        forearm                                                    40.00

    With wooden or rubber hand permanently attached, without the
        implements and without gearing for raising forearm         50.00

    With gearing for raising forearm                               60.00

    With detachable wooden or rubber hand, including implements,
        without gearing for raising forearm                        60.00

    With gearing for raising forearm                               65.00


_Manner of Attaching_

No. 330 represents the corset that is used with arms for upper
amputation. The arm is laced or buckled to the corset, and draught cord
in the back is for raising the forearm by a shrug of the shoulders.


_Ball-and-Socket Wrist Joint for Amputation above the Elbow_

No. 331 represents wooden arm for amputation above the elbow, with
ball-and-socket wrist joint. An explanation of the ball-and-socket
wrist for amputation below the elbow is given on page 69 under No. 323.
The joint is universal and admits of placing the hand in any position,
as shown by dotted lines. This is kept in place by spring friction on
the ball. The wrist cannot be made quite the natural shape—that we are
able to produce without the ball-and-socket joint; but this must be,
necessarily, round. This part, however, is usually covered with the cuff
or sleeve and is not conspicuous.

[Illustration: 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335]

No. 332 is a sectional view of the arm and hand. A forward impulse of
the shoulder and stump causes traction of the cord, moving the geared
segment wheels so as to raise the forearm to any degree of flexion, when
it is retained in position by means of a latch passing through a spring
post and locking automatically. The wearer is enabled to conveniently
carry a coat, shawl, basket, etc., on the artificial arm. A pressure on
the button underneath the arm releases the lock, and the forearm is again
under control of the stump and shoulders. The spring in the hand is for
keeping the thumb in position and is the same as we put in all hands with
movable thumb.


PRICE, NO. 331

    With wood or rubber hand                   $70.00


_Combination Table Knife and Fork_

No. 333, page 72, represents one of these useful implements, designed and
made expressly for those who have been deprived of the use of one hand,
and no such person can afford to be without one for a day. The blade is
thin steel, ground to a sharp edge and terminating in a fork. A rolling
motion will cut the food, and a twist of the hand will bring the fork
into position for use. No. 334 represents a leather sheath into which the
knife can be inserted.


PRICES, NOS. 333 AND 334

    Redwood handle                              $0.60
    Ebony handle                                  .75
    Bone handle                                  1.00
    Ivory handle                                 3.00
    Pearl handle                                 4.00
    Sheath, extra                                 .25


_Pocket Knife for One-armed Persons_

No. 335, page 72, represents a simple, serviceable knife that can be
operated quickly and conveniently with one hand. A pull of the thumb
opens the blade slot, the blade drops down and out and is securely
locked; invert the knife, with the blade up, and a pull of the thumb
allows it to drop back into the handle.


PRICES, NO. 335

    Five and one-half inches long when opened   $0.50
    Nine inches long when opened                 1.00




SUNDRIES


TRUSSES made to order with guaranteed success; hard rubber, celluloid,
leather, wire and elastic. All desirable styles are carried in stock.
Mechanical treatment of difficult cases of hernia a specialty. Truss
supplies and repairs. Send for truss catalogue.

ELASTIC STOCKINGS for varicose veins and weak or swollen joints. Send for
prices and directions for measurements.

ABDOMINAL SUPPORTERS AND OBESITY BELTS. Large variety in elastic and
non-elastic. Special supporters, our own pattern, for use after abdominal
operations.

DEFORMITY APPLIANCES for paralyzed and weak limbs made to order.

RAWHIDE JACKETS for curvature of the spine. These are light, rigid and
porous and a great improvement over the plaster or leather jackets.

TRICYCLES FOR CRIPPLES. Hand and foot power, with ball bearings and
rubber-cushion or pneumatic tires. We are special agents for these
machines, as we are for invalid chairs. Send for tricycle catalogue.

SURGICAL BANDAGES, SUSPENSORIES, UTERINE SUPPORTERS, ETC.


_Crutches and Crutch Supplies_

We sell only the best quality of these goods and such as can be
absolutely relied upon. Sent on receipt of price, or C.O.D. if order is
accompanied with a deposit of one dollar to cover express charges if for
any reason the crutches are returned to us. Special crutches will be made
to order for such as desire something different from the regular line,
but advance payment is required. Our crutch catalogue gives more complete
descriptions than the brief ones given here and will be forwarded to any
who apply for it.

[Illustration: 1 2 4 5 6 17 21 29 32 35 44]

    No. 1—Spring top, socket and jaw bottom. Prices, per pair:
    Rosewood or lancewood, $9.50; extra heavy, $10; rock maple, $7;
    extra heavy, $8.

    No. 2—Cow-horn top. Rock maple, cherry tops and hand rests.
    Prices, per pair: Quality A, plain ferrule bottom, $2.50; extra
    heavy, $3. Quality C, with No. 35 bottom, No. 32 cushion,
    $3.75; extra heavy, $4.50.

    No. 4—Plain Split. Rock maple, cherry tops and hand rests, no
    ferrule at bottom. Price, per pair, $1.50.

    No. 5—Padded top. Rock maple, cherry tops and hand rests.
    Prices, per pair: Quality A, plain ferrule at bottom, $2.50;
    extra heavy, $3. Quality B, No. 35 socket, No. 32 cushion,
    $3.75; extra heavy, $4.50.

    No. 6—Hard top, socket and jaw bottom. Prices, per pair:
    Rosewood or lancewood, $9.50; extra heavy, $10; rock maple,
    rosewood tops and hand rests, $7; extra heavy, $8.

    No. 21—Socket and jaw bottom. Medium size, $2 per pair; large
    size, $2.50 per pair. No. 44 jaws with flange bottom used
    without extra charge.

    No. 35—Sockets. Two sizes, $1 per pair.

    No. 29—Pure gum white rubber cushions. Medium size, 50 cents
    per pair; large size, 75 cents per pair.

    No. 17—Rubber tips to slip on over end of crutches or cane.
    Various sizes. Prices, three-eighths to one inch, 20 cents per
    pair.

In corresponding, if the following questions are answered it will give
us a very good idea of your condition and will better enable us to judge
what will be suitable for you in the way of an artificial limb. Give
the number as it appears before the question and then the answer to the
question.

    1. Your name

    2. Post office

    3. County

    4. State

    5. Age

    6. Weight

    7. Height

    8. Occupation

    9. Leg or arm amputated

    10. When amputated

    11. Right or left

    12. Above or below elbow or knee

    13. If above, give length from body

    14. If below, give length from knee pan or elbow joint

    15. What is condition of stump

    16. Can you take any pressure on end of stump

    17. Cause of amputation

    18. Ever use an artificial limb

    19. If so, what style and make, and how long

    20. Was it satisfactory

    21. If not, why

    22. Have you one of our new catalogues

    23. Would it be an inducement for you to give us an order if we
    sent a man to take your measurements

    24. If we did so, would you stand a part of the expense

    25. Do you wish to work for a free artificial limb premium? If
    so, we will send you particulars

Is there any special information you would like on the subject of
artificial limbs? If so, let us know what it is, and we will do the best
we can to enlighten you.

Date

Chasmar-Winchell New York and Pittsburg

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAKING OF A MAN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
